[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed,"
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today, we'll be exploring
consciousness, evolution,
and human survival.
My guest is Dr. Stanislav
Groff, author of numerous books,
including "The Psychology
of the Future,"
"The Adventure of Self
Discovery," and "LSD
Psychotherapy."
Welcome, Stan.
>> Thank you for having me.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
Your work has ranged
through altered states
of consciousness,
transpersonal psychology,
the spiritual aspects
of psychology.
But you have a
particular interest
in seeing how this field
of study and experience
can be applied to the
very serious problems that
are facing humanity now.
>> You see, what happened
in my work is what happened
in the work of some
other psychologists,
which is something that
started as clinical work quite
automatically developed into
realms that had some kind
of social implications.
This is not something
that I have chosen,
but something that
people repeatedly
sort of discovered and explored
in their own experiences.
>> And when you think about
it, humanity for thousands
of years, since pretty much the
beginning of recorded history,
has faced a series of
continual episodes of violence
and oppression,
social dislocation,
mostly created by ourselves.
>> I think there are two forces
that are certainly significant.
One is violence, and the other
one, kind of insatiable greed
seems to be really very
characteristic of human beings.
It's never enough, never
enough money, power, territory,
status, and kind of this
endless search for more.
>> And as a consequence
of the greed,
we see that we're developing
our economy and our industrial
production at the
expense of our future.
>> Well, I think, in the past,
what was happening is that both
greed and violence didn't really
challenge, somehow, nature.
And what happened during
the Industrial Revolution
is you had this population
explosion and also
a tremendous increase
of production,
that somehow these two
elements in human nature
are really threatening
survival of the human species
and also of life on this planet.
>> And of course,
thinkers from many,
many disciplines are
aware of this situation,
have tried to get
a handle on it.
There are some, I suppose, who
would suggest it's inevitable,
it's biological.
Other people say this
is learned behavior.
real question is, what
are we to do about it?
>> Well, the work that we have
done here on consciousness
research and transpersonal
psychology shows some new
perspectives, both in terms
of understanding the roots
of violence and greed,
but also finding some ways
of alleviating it.
>> And we'll talk about those.
But I want to focus a
little bit on the roots.
Because I know you
take issue with people
who would suggest that
violence and greed
are built into us biologically.
>> Although this is actually
a kind of a dominant theory,
all those concepts like that,
"Naked Ape," Desmond Morris,
we came out of the
animal kingdom.
And this is why we
are the way we are.
Concepts like Paul
MacLean's the triune brain.
You know, we have not
just the neocortex,
but we also have the
mammalian, the reptilian brain,
with all kinds of
primitive sort of impulses.
Concepts like biology, Richard
Dawkins' "Selfish Gene,"
and so on.
But the problem is that
violence that we see in humans
has no parallel in nature.
In nature, you see, with
some few exceptions,
you see something that's sort
survival, pursuit of food,
maybe sexual competition,
defending territory.
But you don't find any parallel
to this absolutely useless mass
violence that characterizes
the human species.
>> Genocides and holocausts.
>> Genocides, Holocaust
concentration camps.
>> These things go way
beyond biological necessity.
>> So Erich Fromm in his
very wonderful book "Anatomy
of Destructiveness" suggested
that human violence is really
unique.
He calls it malignant
violence as compared
to the one that
runs through nature.
>> Yeah, for the most part,
people don't experience,
at least in my lifetime, that
kind of malignant violence.
It's something we know
occurs in human history.
But it seems to be episodic.
>> Yeah, so then the question
is, what is the alternative?
And of course, depth
psychology suggested
that this uniquely
human violence
has something to do
with the difficulties
of our development,
of our childhood.
It's to do with interpersonal
dynamics, frustrations,
emotional abuse,
rejection, and so on.
>> And there's some interesting
studies of political leaders
who had unfortunate
childhoods, Hitler.
>> But still, in my perspective,
these are fairly meek theories
in explaining somehow the
depth and the scope of human
violence.
And the work non-ordinary
states brought
some interesting
additional insights.
>> Well, when you look at
non-ordinary states visionary
states of consciousness,
psychedelic states,
holotropic states
of consciousness,
people often have images that
are also expressed in religious
iconography.
There's, one might
say, a demonic quality.
>> Yes, well, there is
certainly this transpersonal,
this is archetypal dimension.
Jung talked about these
powerful archetypes
that can run not just the
individual human psyche
but even nations, sort
of an historical event.
And the pantheon
of all mythologies
is always dichotomized.
I mean, there are
the deities and there
are the restful deities.
>> I recall reading a paper that
Jung wrote in the 1930s before
the onset of the Second World
War in which he noticed that
many of his patients were
coming to him with imagery
of the ancient
German War God Wotan.
>> Yes, and he actually
predicted that Germany seems
to be facing a catastrophe.
And he believed that the
underlying archetype was
that of Ragnarok,
which was is twilight
of the gods, the
Gotterdammerung,
and also predicted
that, for that reason,
it would be ultimately
self-destructive.
>> So what you're
fundamentally saying, Stan,
is that if we want to
understand the source,
the root cause of this greed
and this violence that's causing
so much damage in the world,
that we have to look within
ourselves.
>> And we have to
look very deep.
We have to look beyond
the kind of model
that we have in psychiatry
and psychology, which
is based on postnatal
biography, things that happened
to us after we were born.
And this work,
consciousness research,
studying non-ordinary
states of consciousness,
shows that are much,
much deeper sources.
Some of them, what
take hold perinatal,
related to the trauma of birth.
And then others would be
transpersonal, archetypal,
karmic, and so on.
>> You point out, for
example, that people can,
in a non-ordinary
state of consciousness,
recall and have imagery related
to that period of the birth
process itself, moving
through the birth canal.
And sometimes, people get
fixated on a particular stage
of the birth process which may
feel engulfing or constricting.
>> Yes, what you see is, when
the process of experiential
regression reaches birth, you
can see tremendous pockets
of aggression opening up,
which has something to do with
the fact that for many
hours, the child, the fetus,
is facing a life-threatening,
very uncomfortable situation
that involves, besides
pressures, and pains,
also choking.
And that triggers
tremendous fury,
biological, amorphous fury.
So there is a deep
reservoir of aggression
that we carry very deep
in the unconscious.
And then depending on what
the post-natal life is,
it either gets more
or less covered.
It creates a kind of
psychological buffering zone.
Or that whole area
remains open and becomes
something that shapes
people's behavior
and kind of daily experience.
>> And in holotropic
breath work sessions,
which is a form of therapy
that you developed,
you've had people actually draw
imagery expressing what that
experience was like.
>> Well, both in psychedelic
sessions and in the holotropic
breath work, people actually
draw very similar images
of the perinatal process, where
besides these fetal elements,
you have also sort of
powerful archetypal images.
For example, images
of spiders as kind
of symbols of the
devouring feminine,
so you can see sort
of fetuses being
attacked by these tarantulas,
gigantic tarantulas.
Or some other images
portray, somehow,
of the uterus more
like an octopus that's
kind of entangling the fetus.
But the uterine contractions
are our experience
as these choking tentacles.
And the beginning of birth
can be experienced, actually,
is what I call cosmic
engulfment, when you can see
archetypal images of
sort of open mouths,
or you can see something
like maelstrom or quicksand
sort of engulfing.
>> Very, very powerful,
potent images.
Stan, we're going to
take a short break.
We'll be back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're back.
Stan, right before
our break, you
were describing the
imagery that people
will get when they look
deeply into what you call
the perinatal stage, or the
period right before birth,
some of the most deeply-embedded
images of our own subconscious,
images of violence,
strangulation, suffocation.
And the interesting
thing, in terms
of society and
human survival, is
that these are some of
the very same images
that are associated with
grotesque political events
that, from time to time,
seem to engulf humanity.
>> It actually came to me
as a great surprise that,
besides these archetypal
images of spiders, tarantulas,
engulfment, and so on,
different stages of birth,
when they are confronted
in experiential regression,
are also associated
with, actually,
sociopolitical images.
for example, the
identification with a fetus
who is stuck in the womb when
the cervix is still closed
can be associated with
images of concentration camps
or totalitarian countries
where there is an oppressor
or there is a very, very
difficult, oppressive regime.
And situations where
the cervix opens up
and there is the struggle
in the birth canal
are associated with
images of revolutions.
Enough of the oppression
will overthrow the tyrant
and we will again
breathe freely.
And the moment of birth
frequently associated
with images of end of war or a
successful end of revolution.
>> You know, earlier
in our discussion,
I remarked that these sorts
of things aren't so common
in our lives.
And I guess I was thinking
more of my own life.
Because, of course, you
grew up in Czechoslovakia
under such a regime.
>> I experienced both the Nazis,
six years of Nazis, and then,
of course, the Communist
regime, both very oppressive.
>> And it seems is if humanity
may be engaged in a process
right now of digesting these
horrors and coming to terms
with them, that perhaps we have
the possibility of learning
enough about ourselves so that
we can prevent these sorts
of horrible tragedies
from occurring.
>> But Chris Bache wrote a very
interesting book called "Dark
Night Early Dawn" in which
he looks at this fact that
in these perinatal sessions, we
actually confront these horrors
from the collective unconscious.
And he expressed
sort of this belief
that maybe when we reach that
level, that we are not just
doing personal
therapy, but may be
clearing the species,
the human species,
from all these leftovers.
>> You're suggesting,
your work suggests,
your life's work suggests,
that psychology itself--
if we're going to confront
this level of evil,
we can't limit ourselves
to post-natal development.
We have to draw upon the
insights of the world's
spiritual traditions.
And in particular, you
look at, for example,
amongst other things, the
Tibetan Wheel of Life.
>> Yes.
You know, that's a
very beautiful example
of kind of a recipe for
individual liberation
which ultimately would be
also collective liberation.
>> It's part of the
Buddhist tradition.
>> Yeah, the idea that the
suffering, the misery in life,
is caused by primarily
three forces.
That is ignorance, very,
very profound ignorance
about our own
nature, about nature
of reality, which
is called Avidya;
then violence,
aggression in our life;
and the third force would be
lust, desire, and attachment.
>> And in the Tibetan Thangka,
imagery of the Wheel of Life,
these are symbolized by three
little animals chasing each
other and causing the
world to spin around.
>> Yes, that's that famous
Wheel of Life held in the grip
of the Lord of Death.
And it has six locus, or realms,
into which we can be born
or reborn, the Gods, the Jealous
Gods, the Asuras, the Hungry
Ghosts, the Human Realm, the
Animal Realm, Hellish Realm,
and so on.
And in the middle of
that wheel is a circle
that has three animals
representing these three
poisons or three forces
that cause suffering,
which is, desire,
lust, and aggression.
>> A pig, a snake and
a rooster, as I recall.
But the point of the Tibetan
tradition, if I'm correct,
is that we, through
discipline, through being
able to fearlessly see
ourselves as we are,
we have the possibility
of achieving
a state of enlightenment where
these instinctual forces are
transformed.
>> Yes, the old Buddhism,
the Hinayana Buddhism,
had the idea that we should
basically move away from
existence altogether
into nirvana.
Whereas what
characterizes Mahayana,
such as Vajrayana Buddhism,
is that we can actually
reach different
degrees of Nirvana
by eliminating or reducing
these three forces.
And it's interesting that
work with non-ordinary states
seems to really be very
useful in this regard.
>> These two schools of
Buddhism you refer to, Hinayana
and Mahayana, are sometimes
called the little boat
in the big boat, meaning the
little boat IS for the elite
who can achieve enlightenment.
But the big boat is
for all of humanity.
>> Yes, yes.
>> And what you seem to be
suggesting is that this ancient
Buddhist tradition resonates
somewhat with the modern work
of consciousness research.
And in fact, it might be part
of a social movement that
is at this very moment
doing what some people might
have thought unimaginable,
transforming the human race.
>> Yes, actually one of my
favorite workshops is one that
we do jointly with Jack
Cornfield, which combines,
holotropic breath
work and Vipassana.
And it's quite amazing how these
two approaches, how well they
complement each other.
>> Vipassana is a form
of Buddhist meditation,
sometimes called
Insight Meditation.
It's a disciplined
way of looking
at the contents
of our own minds,
which is really what your other
work in holotropic breath work
and LSD psychotherapy
also involves,
is a disciplined
approach to encountering
the depths of the mind.
>> Buddhism primarily focuses on
the individual transformation.
And my work with psychedelics
and the breath work
initially was focusing on
individual transformation.
But the very exciting thing
is the possible social
implications.
For example, the images
from perinatal sessions
that we talked about appear
in political caricatures.
At the time of crisis, when,
for example, two countries
are in war with each other,
they portray each other
using images that are almost
indistinguishable from those
that people draw
when they confront
their own trauma of birth.
>> So what you're saying is
that we, as a population,
as a species, need to get in
touch with, to understand,
that inner spider,
that inner octopus,
that inner demonic creature.
I kind of want to go
like ugh, to own it.
>> Sam Keen wrote a very
interesting book called "The
Faces of the Enemy," showing
exactly the same thing,
that two countries at war
portray each other using
exactly the same kind of
images, the octopi, the dragons,
the engulfing monsters,
and so on, the spiders,
and concluded that basically
what's happening here is that
this is our own shadow that
is disowned and is projected.
And then we go and
fight it somewhere else
rather than confronting
the inner demons.
>> The Islamic people use
the term Jihad, the holy war,
which I think is another phrase
for battling or transforming
that process inside
of one's self.
Otherwise, it spills out.
And it becomes a large
scale social problem.
>> You know, unfortunately,
in our culture we have this
extroverted attitude.
We sort of try to look around,
and identify the problems,
and try to resolve
everything on the outside.
Where it seems like
the only feasible way
of facing the
crisis in the world
would be large numbers of people
turning inside and humanity
undergoing a major psycho
spiritual transformation.
>> Well, it seems as if the
problems we face are looming
larger all of the time
because of technology.
But you in your
lifetime and I have
experienced something of a
consciousness revolution,
as well.
It seems to be rising
up from our own depths,
from our own potentials,
to face that problem.
>> Many people are actually in
deep self exploration realize
that they are confronting
somehow, in the inner process,
exactly the same kinds of
elements that are now becoming
a problem in the world.
So they have to confront major
violence within themselves.
They have to confront this
sort of insatiable greed.
They might confront
certain demonic elements
within themselves.
And they describe that it
seems to them that there
is like a race in the world.
On the one hand, if we continue
doing what we have been doing,
just exteriorizing
all the problems,
that we might not make it, might
eradicate life on the planet.
>> Stan, I'm going to
have to interrupt you.
Our time is up.
But I know the antidote is in
conversations such as this one.
Thanks so much
for being with me.
>> And beginning
the transformation.
>> Yeah, and thank
you for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]